In this article, you will learn:

* When, where, and how to test Ajax components
* How to create automatic tests with popular, free, open-source tools;
* How to use testing tools with continuous integration systems.

----

Testing Ajax Web Applications from Square One by Ted Husted

Not long ago, testing Ajax components meant play-testing a page by hand. Today, there are a growing number of tools we can use to simplify and automate Ajax testing.

In this article, we spell out when to test, what to test, and how to test Ajax components. We demonstrate creating automatic tests with YUI Test and OpenQA Selenium, and launching the tests with Hudson, a continuous integration system.

We'll start by introducing Ajax as a technology. Building on that foundation, we then introduce an application we can test with our suite of open source testing tools.  


What is Ajax?

The term Ajax was coined in 2005 as an acronym for "Asynchronous JavaScript And XML". The term describes a technique where scripts running inside of a browser make requests to a server and update the content dynamically, without the usual full-page refresh. Though the acronym is recent, the technique itself dates back to 1998. 

The goal is to let web pages behave less like flat documents and more like dynamic GUI applications. In fact, the popular form of the technique was born out of an attempt to make the Microsoft Exchange Web Client look exactly like Outlook (http://msexchangeteam.com/archive/2005/06/21/406646.aspx). Today, many web-based applications have a rich, GUI-like, look and feel.


How does Ajax work?

Ajax works its magic using a (still) non-standard (but ubiquitous) JavaScript feature known as the asynchronous XMLHttpRequest (or XHR). We can trigger a XHR using any JavaScript event: pressing a button, changing a list selection, tabbing from field to field. The XHR differs from an ordinary HttpRequest in that it works asynchronously. The script fires off the call and goes merrily on its way, without pausing for a response. Instead of waiting, the script registers a "callback" method that can be invoked when the response returns. In the meantime, the script can continue, or even end, and the application doesn't seem to lockup or stall waiting for the server respond. 

Callout: "The XHR differs from an ordinary HttpRequest in that it works asynchronously ... and the application doesn't seem to lockup or stall waiting for the server respond."

When the response does return, the script engine invokes the callback method. The method can then use the content returned in the response to update the page dynamically. We may call it a XMLHttpRequest, but the content it returns can be anything: plain text, a HTML fragment, XML; whatever we need. The classic Ajax lifecycle is illustrated in the figure "Ajax in Action". 

Figure: "Ajax in Action" 
[01-ajax-in-action.png]

While this article isn't intended as an Ajax tutorial, a simple Hello World illustration will make it easier to understand testing JavaScript applications. The figure "Hello World Storyboard" shows the example in action. 

Figure: "Hello World Storyboard" 
[02a-hello-world.png]
[03b-hello-world-alert.png]

The example presents a message when the button is clicked and pops up an Alert dialog. 

To simplify the code, the script for the example, as shown in the figure "Simple Javascript Application", uses the popular Yahoo! User Interface (YUI) library. Given an Internet connection, you can copy the example to a HTML file and open it with a browser. 

Example: "Simple JavaScript Application" 
[03-hello-world.html]

While we could use Hello World to demonstrate testing a JavaScript application, it's not a true Ajax application, since we do not use a XHR to interact with the server. To introduce a XHR, we can add a server-side file to provide the "Hello World" text, and a callback function to receive the response and present the text. 

In our update example, we read the contents of the server-side "ajax-works-result.txt", and present it on the web page. The figure "Ajax Works Storyboard" shows what happens when the example succeeds, and what happens when the file is missing and Ajax Works fails. 

Figure: "Ajax Works Storyboard" 
[04a-ajax-works.png]
[04b-ajax-works-success.png]
[04c-ajax-works-failure.png]

The HTML code in the example "Simple Ajax application" presents a message when the callback succeeds.

Example: "Simple Ajax Application" 
[05a-ajax-works.html]
[05b-ajax-works-resulst.txt]

Unlike the JavaScript example, the Ajax example requires the use of a web server to read the file for us. (For this example, any web server would do.) 

How do we test it?

In the beginning, all JavaScript and Ajax testing came in the form of Alerts, like those we used with Hello World. Today, the scripting landscape is almost crowded with testing tools. In January 2009, the website opensourcetesting.org includes 16 matches for JavaScript tools and 7 for Ajax, as shown by the figure "Open Source Testing Tools". 

Figure: "Open Source Testing Tools" 
[06a-opensourcetesting-javascript.png]
[06b-opensourcetesting-ajax.png]

In this article, we'll look at two tools for testing Ajax at different levels and a third tool for continuous integration. 

 * YUI Test (http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/) is an unit testing framework for adding code-level tests to browser-based JavaScript solutions. If you're familiar with other unit testing frameworks, YUI Test derives characteristics from NUnit (http://www.nunit.org/) and JUnit (http://www.junit.org/).

 * Open QA Selenium (http://seleniumhq.org/) is a functional testing framework for adding UI-level tests to browser-based JavaScript solutions. If you're familiar with other functional testing frameworks, Selenium is similar in design to Canoo WebTest (http://webtest.canoo.com/) and HP QuickTest Professional (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HP_QuickTest_Professional). 

 * Hudson (https://hudson.dev.java.net/) is a continuous integration framework for compiling applications and running tests on an automatic or regular basis. Other CI frameworks like Hudson include Cruise Control (http://cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net/) and Atlassian Bamboo (http://www.atlassian.com/software/bamboo/).

Using this set of tools, we can test an Ajax application like we would test any other solution. We can start with unit tests against the internal code, and then add functional tests against the external user interface. With internal and external tests in place, we can use a continuous integration system to run the tests automatically. 


How do we test Ajax with YUI Test?

When we test conventional applications with frameworks like JUnit and NUnit, our goal is to test the code at the "unit of work" level. In practice, unit testing means using a second program (or test case) to exercise the public methods within a class. The example "Hello NUnit" shows the source and output for a simple NUnit test setup. 

Example: "Hello NUnit" 
[07a-TestNUnit.cs]
[07b-TestNUnit.png]

Yahoo's YUI Test framework follows the same paradigm as JUnit or NUnit. To unit test our code, we create a test case in the form of a HTML page to exercise the public methods with a script. YUI Test even has its own version of a test runner that pops up over the page and displays the outcome of the test methods. The example "Hello YUI" shows the source and output for a simple YUI test setup. 

Example: "Hello YUI Test" 
[08a-test-yui-setup.html]
[08b-test-yui-setup.png]

In our first Hello World example, we embedded some test code, in the form of an alert, into the HTML code. Let's try the same sort of thing with YUI. 

A key feature of YUI Test is that it can select user controls so that tests can run unattended. If we also move the page's script into a separate file, we can call the same script from the production page and the unit test. The example "Test Hello World" shows a YUI Test that clicks the button to present the message, and itemizes the result in the test logger. 

Example: "Test Hello World" 
[09a-hello-world-2.html]
[09b-hello-world-2.js]
[09c-hello-world-2.png]
[09d-test-hello-world.html]
[09e-test-hello-world.png]

That was easy! Let's try it with the Ajax example. (A few minutes later.) Hmmm, that's strange. As shown in the figure "Ajax False Negative", the screen renders correctly, but the YUI Test logger says the test failed ...

Figure: "Ajax False Negative" 
[10-ajax-false-positive.png]

The false positive is a result of the asynchronous nature of Ajax. The browser doesn't wait for the Ajax XHR response, and the test script continues to run. Microseconds later, the response returns, but it's too late. The test has already reported failure!  

Callout: "The false negative is a result of the asynchronous nature of Ajax ... Microseconds later ... the test has already reported failure!"

To test asynchronous code, YUI Test provides a wait() method that can be used in two different ways. Without a parameter, the wait() method exits the script until a resume() method is called (usually by an event handler). The resume() method accepts a single parameter, which is a function to run when the script resumes. Alternatively, a function can be passed to wait() along with a timeout value (in miliseconds), so that the server has a chance to respond. When the timeout expires, YUI runs the function. 

The example "Test Ajax Works" shows using the wait() method to give the callback enough time to launch. (As before, this example must be run on a web server to succeed.)

Example: "Test Ajax Works" 
[11a-ajax-works-2.html]
[11b-ajax-works-2.png]
[11c-ajax-works-2.js]
[11d-test-ajax-works.html]
[11e-test-ajax-works.png]

YUI Test is a mature framework with many more features than we have been able to show here. For more, see the excellent documentation on the YUI site (http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/yuitest/).


How do we test Ajax with Selenium? 

While YUI Test can simulate some user actions, it's not intended to fully test the user interface of an application. A better choice for functional testing is Open QA Selenium. 

Selenium is actually a suite of tools, each with its own speciality.  

 * Selenium IDE is a FireFox plugin that records and runs tests within your browser. 
 * Selenium Remote Control is a Java proxy server that runs Selenium tests across multiple platforms.
 * Selenium Grid runs across multiple Remote Control servers to load test applications.

A common workflow is to create, run, and edit tests using Selenium IDE, export the tests to run with Remote Control, and finally to load-test everything with Grid. The net result is an end-to-end functional testing solution. 

In this article, we use IDE to record tests, and then we use Remote Control to run the tests with Hudson.


How do we record tests with Selenium IDE?

The Selenium IDE can be loaded directly into FireFox from the plugin repository. When launched, the plugin opens a child window where we can record and edit user actions. Selenium can select controls, input data, and read text from the screen as it is updated. The figure "Selenium IDE" shows completing a typical data-entry form with the plugin activated. 

Figure: "Selenium IDE"
[12-selenium-ide.png]

If we make a mistake during recording, the IDE can edit the original input, as shown in the figure "Editing Selenese." The IDE includes hints and autocomplete for all of the Selenium commands, making it easy to learn the language with resorting to (ugh!) opening a manual.  

Figure: "Editing Selenese"
[13-editing-selenese.png]
 
As we progress through a workflow, Selenium can confirm where we are by reading text from the document object model (DOM) loaded into the browser. The figure "Verifying Text" shows how we can confirm that a login succeeded, and the user's name is being displayed. Note that while we indicate the text on the screen, Selenium reads from the DOM -- not the display. 

Figure: "Verifying Text"
[14-verifying-text.png]

Like YUI Test, Selenium includes features that support testing asycronous Ajax code. Instead of just verifying text is on the screen "now", we can ask Selenium to pause for a time certain, or to watch for a change, and then proceed. The net result is testing Ajax web applications with Selenium is simply a matter of choosing the "wait" version of a command. 

When our application workflow is complete, we can save the test script for later use, as shown by the figure "Saving Selenese". 

Figure: "Saving Selenese"
[15-saving-selenese.png]

Natively, Selenium stores commands in a HTML table with three columns. The first column is the command name, the second column is an HTML identifier, and the third column is an additional argument, like text to insert. (See the figure "Native Selenese".) If the IDE's editing capabilities weren't enough, you can also edit the HTML file directly. 

Figure: "Native Selenese"
[16-native-selenese.png]

The IDE can also playback the Selenium tests, as shown by the figure "Running Selenese". In usual unit test form, the IDE glows green when the tests pass, and burns red when tests fail. 

Figure: "Running Selenese"
[17-running-selenese.png]

While the browser-based IDE and test runner are sufficient for light testing, more rigorous acceptance tests can make good use of a conventional testing environment. To answer that concern, the IDE lets us export the test to conventional source code languages, ready to run with JUnit, NUnit, or the Perl, Python, and Ruby equivalents. The figure "Exporting Selenese" shows the JUnit equivalent of our HTML test. 

Figure: "Exporting Selenese"
[18-exporting-selenese.png]

Once scripts are exported to conventional source code, we can run them as part of an ordinary unit test suite ... with the help of Selenium Remote Control. 


How can we use Selenium Remote Control to run unit tests?

With the help of Remote Control, exported Selenium tests can be run and maintained along with the rest of the applications unit tests. The figure "Testing Ajax Works" shows the C# version of a simple Selenium test set. 

Figure: "Testing Ajax Works"
[19-Testing-Ajax-Works.cs]

Selenium Remote Control is a free, open source download from OpenQA <>. There's not a formal installation utility, you can just unzip the files to any convenient directory. 

We created the C# source code by 

 1 opening our Ajax test pages with the Selenium IDE recorder running. 
 2 exporting the test to C#. 
 3 coping the code into a Visual Studio class file and tweaking the namespace. 
 4 adding a refrence to the Selenium DDL in the Remote Control download. 
 
(For another platform, such as Java, the process is similar, and just as easy.)

At this point, the source compiles, but it won't run as a unit test, because the code calls the Selenum Remote Control server. 

Selenium RC is not currently available for .NET, but it is available for Java. Since our test reaches out through HTTP, the platform doesn't really matter. We can run the proxy server under Java, and our class can use the proxy to run our tests under C#. 

Likewise, it doesn't matter what type of web server hosts the underlying Ajax pages. It could be Microsoft IIS, or Apache Tomcat, or Apache HTTPD. Sincd the tranaction goes through HTTP, any standards-compliant web server will do. 

The figure "Launching Selenium Server" shows the simple batch file we used to launch the server under Windows. For your environment, the drive and path names may vary. 

Figure: "Launching Selenium Server"
[20-selenium-server.bat]

With both a web server and the Selenium server running, we can launch the process using the NUnit test runner. When the test runner launches, it automatically brings up FireFox to run the tests. FireFox, in turn, opens two windows, one for its own test runner, and another for the code under test. 

The figure "Selenium Remote Control in Action" is a screen shot of all all three windows running together. 

Figure: "Selenium Remote Control in Action"
[21-selenium-remote-control.png]

As an added bonus, since Selenium is designed to automatically open browser pages, it can also run our YUI Tests. The net result is that we can run all of our tests using any tool that can run conventional unit tests. One such tool is the Hudson continuous integration server. 

While mature, Selenium suffers from a perpetual beta state. After years of betas, the Selenium team is hoping to have a 1.0 "production" release in 2009. But, don't let the beta tag fool you. Many of us have been using Selenium for years. For more about Selenium, cruise the documentation at their new Selenium HQ website (http://seleniumhq.org/). 


How can we use Hudson to automate our Ajax tests?

While reducing the Selenium test to a unit test seems is a step toward full automation, we still have to press the button. Ideally, we'd like the test to be run automatically, without human intervention, each time a change is made to the project's source code. 

One feature provided by a continuous integration server is to automatically run the unit test suite whenever a change is checked into a project's repository. There are many popular integration servers available, such as CruiseControl, Bamboo, or Continuum. One of the easiest to setup is a product named "Hudson". 

Hudson ships as a standalone Java web application, ready to auto-deploy to most Java containers. If you are already running a Java container on your server, this can be the easiest way to deploy Hudson. 

If you are not running a Java web server, Hudson also ships with an embedded container so that you run it from the Java command line. After downloading the the hudson.war from <http://hudson.gotdns.com/latest/hudson.war>, with Java 1.5 or later installed, you can immediately launch the server by running 

> java -jar hudson.war

Once Hudson bootstraps itself, the server's dashboard can be accessed on port 8080, as shown in the figure "Welcome to Hudson".  

Figure: "Welcome to Hudson"
[22-welcome-to-hudson.png]

If you are already running a service on port 8080, or haven't set JAVA_HOME in your environment, or prefer a different web root, you can specify those settings at the end of the command line. (Note the double hyphens.)

 --httpPort=8080
 --javaHome=<no default>
 --webroot=~/.hudson/war

By default, Hudson will use a ".hudson" folder in the user's home directory to store its configuration files, which can be overridden by setting HUDSON_HOME as an enviroment variable, system property, or JNDI variable. 

Hudson is easy to reconfigure, so don't worry about getting the startup settings right the first time!


How do we configure Hudson to run our tests?

Once the Hudson dashboard is up and running, setting up a job is mainly a matter of point and click. The figure "Tasking Hudson" shows the configuration form.

Figure: "Tasking Hudson"
[23-tasking-hudson.png]

In creating a job, only one setting is required, one or more build tasks to build the code, run the tests, or perform other related work. Other optional tasks that Hudson can include in a job are:

 * Utilize a SCM, such as CVS, SourceSafe, or Subversion, among others. 
 * Select a trigger to fire the job. 
 * Collect post-build information to archive binaries or record results. 
 * Notify other people or systems with the job result. 
 
A typical Hudson job will monitor the source code repository (SCM) for a change. When the code changes, Hudson will trigger a check-out, build the latest and greatest and run any automatic tests, and then notify other actors of the outcome. 

The figure "Running Hudson" shows the continuous integration system running our NUnit tests, automatically, in response to checking in an update to Subversion.
 
Figure: "Running Hudson"
[24-running-hudson.png]

Although it's a Java server, Hudson can be used to build software from other platforms, including Ruby and .NET. There's even a plugin for Microsoft's Team Foundation Server!


Is that all there is?

Using tools like YUI, Selenium, and Hudson, we can test Ajax applications as easily as conventional web applications. Aside from the products discussed here, there are alternatives in each category, like JS Unit, Canoo WebTest, and CruiseControl. 

The important thing is to try one or more of these tools with your next project, and follow Kent Beck's sage advice: "Test until fear turns to boredom!"

####
